## 10.5 Interpreting Confidence Intervals

To summarize where we are: confidence intervals are constructed around our parameter estimate—in the case of the empty model, the sample mean. What a 95% confidence interval tells us is that there is a 95% likelihood that the interval contains the true parameter (so, the mean of the population). The interval is typically symmetrical with respect to the sample mean, extending the same distance below the sample mean as it does above it.

The size of a confidence interval tells us how much fluctuation there is in our parameter estimate. It can be expressed in the original units of measurement (e.g., mm) or in terms of number of standard errors above and below the mean. The larger the standard error, the wider the confidence interval. We also realized that the confidence interval (because it is dependent on the standard error) is determined in part by 1) our degrees of freedom, and 2) the standard deviation of the population.    

<iframe data-type="learnosity" id="Ch10_Interpreting_1"  src="https://coursekata.org/learnosity/preview/Ch10_Interpreting_1" width="100%" height="1650"></iframe>

### Units of the Confidence Interval

The actual size of the 95% confidence interval is in the units of the estimate. In the case of the empty model of thumb length, the 95% confidence interval is shown below.

```
confint(Empty.model)
```

```
               2.5 %   97.5 %
(Intercept) 58.72794 61.47938
```

<iframe data-type="learnosity" id="Ch10_Interpreting_2"  src="https://coursekata.org/learnosity/preview/Ch10_Interpreting_2" width="100%" height="3350"></iframe>

<iframe data-type="vimeo" id="379374763" width="640" height="360" src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/379374763" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Try computing the 95% confidence interval for **PoundsLost** by housekeepers in the **MindsetMatters** data frame. Remember, the confidence interval is computed based on model estimates, so fit and print the empty model first. 

<p><iframe data-type="datacamp" id="ch10-17" style="border: 0px #ffffff none;" src="https://uclatall.github.io/czi-stats-course/data-camp/chapter-10/ch10-17.html" width="100%" height="350" ></iframe></p>

<iframe data-type="learnosity" id="Ch10_Interpreting_3"  src="https://coursekata.org/learnosity/preview/Ch10_Interpreting_3" width="100%" height="590"></iframe>

Compute the margin of error (in pounds) around the estimate of $$b_{0}$$ using this confidence interval.  

<p><iframe data-type="datacamp" id="ch10-18" style="border: 0px #ffffff none;" src="https://uclatall.github.io/czi-stats-course/data-camp/chapter-10/ch10-18.html" width="100%" height="350" ></iframe></p>

```
[1] 0.631077
```

<iframe data-type="learnosity" id="Ch10_Interpreting_4"  src="https://coursekata.org/learnosity/preview/Ch10_Interpreting_4" width="100%" height="680"></iframe>

You can think of this confidence interval (-1.7 to -.44) as telling us about the variability in our estimate. Even though the average pounds lost in the sample of housekeepers was -1.07 pounds, we are reasonably confident that the true population mean could be as low as -1.7 and as high as -.44. 

### Keeping Your Distributions Straight

<iframe data-type="learnosity" id="Ch10_Keeping_1"  src="https://coursekata.org/learnosity/preview/Ch10_Keeping_1" width="100%" height="370"></iframe>

All this started because our best estimate of the population mean was the sample mean. But we tried to quantify the possible error in our estimate of the population mean. After all, samples do not look exactly like the population they come from. 

The 95% confidence interval says that we can be 95% confident that the true population mean (which we don’t know and can never measure) is within a certain range. If this range is really large, then our estimate is not as good; but if it’s smaller, our estimate is better.  

<iframe data-type="learnosity" id="Ch10_Interpreting_5"  src="https://coursekata.org/learnosity/preview/Ch10_Interpreting_5" width="100%" height="280"></iframe>

The reason we invoked sampling distributions is to model variation in our estimate (in this case the mean) across samples. Sampling distributions help us deal with sampling variation—how much samples from the same population (or Data Generating Process) might vary. We used the sampling distribution to estimate the margin of error—how far off the population mean could be from our estimate.  

<iframe data-type="learnosity" id="Ch10_Interpreting_6"  src="https://coursekata.org/learnosity/preview/Ch10_Interpreting_6" width="100%" height="230"></iframe>

The sample mean is the best point estimate we have of the population mean. So, we start there in trying to estimate the range of possible population parameters. But we know that our sample could have been a particularly low or high sample mean. The confidence interval helps us keep those possibilities in mind.
